Watch – shows current values for any expressions.

You can click the plus + and input an expression. The debugger will show its value, automatically recalculating it in the process of execution.

Call Stack – shows the nested calls chain.

At the current moment the debugger is inside hello() call, called by a script in index.html (no function there, so it’s called “anonymous”).

If you click on a stack item (e.g. “anonymous”), the debugger jumps to the corresponding code, and all its variables can be examined as well.

Scope – current variables.

Local shows local function variables. You can also see their values highlighted right over the source.

Global has global variables (out of any functions).

There’s also this keyword there that we didn’t study yet, but we’ll do that soon.


#Moving to the next partt

Tracing the execution
Now it’s time to trace the script.

There are buttons for it at the top of the right panel. Let’s engage them.

 – “Resume”: continue the execution, hotkey F8.
Resumes the execution. If there are no additional breakpoints, then the execution just continues and the debugger loses control.

Here’s what we can see after a click on it:


The execution has resumed, reached another breakpoint inside say() and paused there. Take a look at the “Call Stack” at the right. It has increased by one more call. We’re inside say() now.

 – “Step”: run the next command, hotkey F9.
Run the next statement. If we click it now, alert will be shown.

Clicking this again and again will step through all script statements one by one.

 – “Step over”: run the next command, but don’t go into a function, hotkey F10.
Similar to the previous “Step” command, but behaves differently if the next statement is a function call (not a built-in, like alert, but a function of our own).

If we compare them, the “Step” command goes into a nested function call and pauses the execution at its first line, while “Step over” executes the nested function call invisibly to us, skipping the function internals.

The execution is then paused immediately after that function call.

That’s good if we’re not interested to see what happens inside the function call.

 – “Step into”, hotkey F11.
That’s similar to “Step”, but behaves differently in case of asynchronous function calls. If you’re only starting to learn JavaScript, then you can ignore the difference, as we don’t have asynchronous calls yet.

For the future, just note that “Step” command ignores async actions, such as setTimeout (scheduled function call), that execute later. The “Step into” goes into their code, waiting for them if necessary. See DevTools manual for more details.

 – “Step out”: continue the execution till the end of the current function, hotkey Shift+F11.
Continue the execution and stop it at the very last line of the current function. That’s handy when we accidentally entered a nested call using , but it does not interest us, and we want to continue to its end as soon as possible.

 – enable/disable all breakpoints.
That button does not move the execution. Just a mass on/off for breakpoints.

 – enable/disable automatic pause in case of an error.
When enabled, if the developer tools is open, an error during the script execution automatically pauses it. Then we can analyze variables in the debugger to see what went wrong. So if our script dies with an error, we can open debugger, enable this option and reload the page to see where it dies and what’s the context at that moment.